---
title: "The Intersection of Atheism, Science, and Belief: Reflections Inspired by `Kushi`"
date: 2023-10-02
permalink: /posts/2023/10/02/atheism/
tags:
  - Thoughts
toc: true
---

I recently watched the Telugu romantic comedy film "Kushi" (2023), and its
portrayal of atheists sparked some intriguing thoughts that I felt compelled to
share. In the movie, the character representing an atheist is depicted as a
"science believer," which, from my perspective, falls short of capturing the
essence of atheism. Allow me to elaborate on this matter further.
There's a distinction between what we can call a
"strong atheist" and a "science supporter." A strong atheist, based on the
classification by renowned evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins, is a person
who asserts with 100% certainty that there is no God. However, even in this
extreme case of atheism, one should not automatically assume a strong
inclination toward science.
The reason I emphasize the distinction between a "supporter of science" and a
"believer" is rooted in the core tenets of scientific thinking. Science is
fundamentally about inquiry, skepticism, and the pursuit of knowledge based on
empirical evidence. It is not a system of belief but a conceptual tool for
understanding the world. In science, one cannot merely believe; one must
question in order to comprehend.

It's essential to recognize that science is not a religion; it is a
methodological approach to gaining insights into the natural world. I can
understand why some may associate atheism with science, as atheists often use
scientific principles to understand or teach about how things work. However,
it's crucial to differentiate between the two concepts.
The assumption of the existence of God is, in a way, a scientific statement. It
posits the existence of a supernatural being within the framework of the
natural world. However, the reason many theists shy away from using science to
prove the existence of God is that such endeavors have historically proven
futile. Science, by its very nature, requires testable hypotheses and empirical
evidence, and these have been elusive when it comes to matters of faith.

My own stance in this ongoing discourse aligns with what can be termed a "De
facto atheist." Based on the current evidence available to me, I find the
existence of God to be highly improbable, and I live my life on the assumption
that there is no God. However, what keeps me from adopting the position of a
strong atheist is the recognition that doing so would involve assuming the
conclusion before conducting the experiment—an approach that goes against the
principles of scientific inquiry.
Moreover, it's crucial to emphasize that being a science supporter means being
open to various opinions and respecting the diversity of thought. Healthy
debates should be encouraged, and differing perspectives should be acknowledged
and examined. This brings me to a critical point: I strongly disagree with the
approach taken by the "atheist" husband in the movie "Kushi," where he attempts
to impose his beliefs on his family. In societies where culture and religion
intersect significantly, it's essential to strike a balance. While we can't
ignore the cultural context, we should always encourage critical thinking and
skepticism.

In conclusion, "Kushi" may have prompted me to reflect on the portrayal of
atheists, but it has also reminded me of the intricate interplay between
atheism, science, and belief. It's fascinating how a mediocre film can serve as
a catalyst for discussions on profound topics, encouraging us to ponder the
complexities of our own beliefs and the role of science in our understanding of
the world. The key takeaway is that, regardless of our beliefs, we should
always remain open to new ideas, respect diverse opinions, and promote
constructive dialogue within our communities.

## Reference
- [Dawkins scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectrum_of_theistic_probability)
