---
title: "Mastering SSH: Tips and Tricks for Efficient Remote Connections"
date: 2023-07-15
permalink: /posts/2023/07/15/ssh-tips/
tags:
  - Workflow
toc: true
---

[SSH](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Shell) (Secure Shell) is a powerful tool for establishing secure remote
connections and executing commands on remote computers. In this blog post, we
will explore some essential tips and tricks to enhance your SSH experience and
make your remote connections more efficient and secure.

## Tip 1: Use SSH Keys! Not Passwords!
One of the best practices in SSH is to use SSH keys instead of passwords for
authentication. SSH keys provide stronger security and eliminate the need to
remember and enter passwords each time you connect to a remote server.
Additionally, you can further enhance security by disabling password
authentication altogether.

To generate an SSH key pair, open a terminal and run the following command:

```bash
ssh-keygen -f ~/.ssh/<filename> -t ed25519 -a 100
```
Replace `<filename>` with the desired name for your key pair. This command
generates an Ed25519 key with a key derivation function (KDF) cost factor of
100.

Instead of Ed25519 we can use `-t rsa -b 2048`, it uses RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) is
an older algorithm that has been widely used for decades and is considered
secure when using a sufficiently large key size, such as 2048 bits or higher.
Ed25519, on the other hand, is a relatively new algorithm based on elliptic
curve cryptography (ECC) and is designed to be more efficient and secure with a
shorter key lengths.

## Tip 2: Copy SSH Public Key to Remote Server
After generating your SSH key pair, you need to copy the public key to the
remote server to enable passwordless authentication. Use the following command:
```bash
ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/<filename>.pub user@domain
```
Replace `<filename>` with the actual name of your key pair and provide the
appropriate username and domain for the remote server. This command securely
transfers the public key and adds it to the `authorized_keys` file on the
remote server.

## Tip 3: Utilize ssh-agent for Key Management
If you encounter issues while connecting to the remote server even after
setting up SSH keys, it might be due to the key not being added to the
ssh-agent. The ssh-agent is a program that holds private keys in memory,
allowing you to use them without entering a passphrase repeatedly.

To add your private key to the ssh-agent, use the following command:
```bash
ssh-add ~/.ssh/<filename>
```
Replace `<filename>` with the actual name of your private key. This command
adds the private key to the ssh-agent, and you can use the `-A` option to
forward the same keys to the remote host upon login.

## Tip 4: Simplify SSH Connections with the Config File
Manually specifying connection details for each SSH session can become
cumbersome. To simplify the process, you can use the SSH config file to define
host-specific configurations.

Open the SSH config file located at `~/.ssh/config` and add the following
configuration:
```
Host RemoteHost
	HostName <ip-address>
	IdentityFile ~/.ssh/<filename>
	User <username>
```
Replace `<ip-address>` with the IP address or domain name of the remote host, `<filename>` with the actual name of your private key, and `<username>` with the username on the remote server.

By defining these configurations, you can establish an SSH connection to the remote host simply by running `ssh RemoteHost`.

## Tip 5: Disable Password Authentication

After setting up your SSH key pair, it's essential to disable password
authentication to enforce key-based authentication. Follow these steps to
disable password authentication:

1. Open the SSH server configuration file on the remote server. The file is usually located at `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`.
2. Look for the line that specifies `PasswordAuthentication` and change its value to `no`.
3. Save the changes and exit the editor.
4. Restart the SSH service on the remote server for the changes to take effect.

With password authentication disabled, you can now connect to the remote server
using only your SSH key, providing an extra layer of security for your SSH
connections.

Remember to keep your private key secure and use a strong passphrase when
generating the key pair. Additionally, ensure that you have a backup of your
private key to avoid any potential data loss.

## Bonus Tip: Boost Productivity with Tmux
Tmux is a terminal multiplexer that allows you to manage multiple terminal
sessions within a single SSH connection. It enables you to split the terminal
window, create multiple panes, and switch between them effortlessly.

To install Tmux, use the appropriate package manager for your operating system.
Once installed, you can start a new Tmux session by running `tmux` in your SSH
terminal. Refer to the earlier section in this blog for essential Tmux
commands.
